v1.10.0 changelogs (#70)
meilisearch/engine-team: meilisearch-release-changelog/v1.10.0.md

Done by @dureuill in #4801, #4815, #4818, #4822.

### ⚠️ Breaking changes - changing the parameters of the REST API

The old parameters of the REST API are too numerous and confusing.

Removed parameters: `query` , `inputField`, `inputType`, `pathToEmbeddings` and `embeddingObject`.
Replaced by
- `request` : A JSON value that represents the request made by Meilisearch to the remote embedder. The text to embed must be replaced by the placeholder value `“{{text}}”`.
- `response`: A JSON value that represents a fragment of the response made by the remote embedder to Meilisearch. The embedding must be replaced by the placeholder value `"{{embedding}}"`.

Before:

```json5
// v1.9 (old) version
{
  "source": "rest",
  "url": "https://localhost:10006",
  "query": {
    "model": "minillm",
 },
  "inputField": ["prompt"],
  "inputType": "text",
  "embeddingObject": ["embedding"]
}
```

```json5
// v1.10 (new) version
{
  "source": "rest",
  "url": "https://localhost:10006",
  "request": {
    "model": "minillm",
    "prompt": "{{text}}"
 },
  "response": {
    "embedding": "{{embedding}}"
 }
}
```

> 

Reviewer: I think that we should highlight that this breaking change will make it impossible to import dumps or upgrade a Meilisearch instance on the Cloud when it has a REST embedder configured.

The paragraph I had in my PR seems apt

```suggestion
> [!CAUTION]
> This is a breaking change to the configuration of REST embedders.
> Importing a dump containing a REST embedder configuration will fail in v1.10 with an error: "Error: unknown field `query`, expected one of `source`, `model`, `revision`, `apiKey`, `dimensions`, `documentTemplate`, `url`, `request`, `response`, `distribution` at line 1 column 752".

Upgrade procedure (Cloud):

1. Remove any embedder with source "rest"
2. Click the button to upgrade your Meilisearch version
4. Re-add any removed embedder, using the new settings.

Upgrade procedure (OSS users):

1. Remove any embedder with source "rest"
2. Create a dump
3. Import that dump in a v1.10
4. Re-add any removed embedder, using the new settings.

```

Rendered below:

--- 

> [!CAUTION]
> This is a breaking change to the configuration of REST embedders.
> Importing a dump containing a REST embedder configuration will fail in v1.10 with an error: "Error: unknown field `query`, expected one of `source`, `model`, `revision`, `apiKey`, `dimensions`, `documentTemplate`, `url`, `request`, `response`, `distribution` at line 1 column 752".

Upgrade procedure (Cloud):

1. Remove any embedder with source "rest"
2. Click the button to upgrade your Meilisearch version
4. Re-add any removed embedder, using the new settings.

Upgrade procedure (OSS users):

1. Remove any embedder with source "rest"
2. Create a dump
3. Import that dump in a v1.10
4. Re-add any removed embedder, using the new settings.

Author: We could make it simpler and less heavy by linking the docs for steps after step 1

I will update

🧰 All official Meilisearch integrations (including SDKs, clients, and other tools) are compatible with this Meilisearch release. Integration deployment happens between 4 to 48 hours after a new version becomes available.

Some SDKs might not include all new features. Consult the project repository for detailed information. Is a feature you need missing from your chosen SDK? Create an issue letting us know you need it, or, for open-source karma points, open a PR implementing it (we'll love you for that ❤️).

# New features and updates 🔥

## Federated search

Use the new `federation` setting of the `/multi-search` route to return a single search result object:

```bash
curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/multi-search' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "federation": {
      "offset": 5,

>       "limit": 10,

Author: ```suggestion
      "limit": 10
```

## Language settings

Use the new `localizedAttributes` index setting and the `locales` search parameter to explicitly set the languages used in document fields and the search query itself. This is particularly useful for <=v1.9 users who have to occasionally resort to alternative Meilisearch images due to language auto-detect issues in [Swedish](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/pull/4604) and [Japanese](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/pull/3882) datasets.

Done by @ManyTheFish in #4819.

### Set language during indexing with `localizedAttributes`

Use the newly introduced `localizedAttributes` setting to explicitly declare which languages correspond to which document fields:

```bash
curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "localizedAttributes": [
      {"locales": ["jpn"], "attributePatterns": ["*_ja"]},
      {"locales": ["eng"], "attributePatterns": ["*_en"]},
      {"locales": ["cmn"], "attributePatterns": ["*_zh"]},
      {"locales": ["fra", "ita"], "attributePatterns": ["latin.*"]},
      {"locales": [], "attributePatterns": ["*"]}
    ]
  }'
```

> `locales` is a list of ISO 631-2/B language codes to assign to a pattern. The currently supported languages are: `epo`, `eng`, `rus`, `cmn`, `spa`, `por`, `ita`, `ben`, `fra`, `deu`, `ukr`, `kat`, `ara`, `hin`, `jpn`, `heb`, `yid`, `pol`, `amh`, `jav`, `kor`, `nob`, `dan`, `swe`, `fin`, `tur`, `nld`, `hun`, `ces`, `ell`, `bul`, `bel`, `mar`, `kan`, `ron`, `slv`, `hrv`, `srp`, `mkd`, `lit`, `lav`, `est`, `tam`, `vie`, `urd`, `tha`, `guj`, `uzb`, `pan`, `aze`, `ind`, `tel`, `pes`, `mal`, `ori`, `mya`, `nep`, `sin`, `khm`, `tuk`, `aka`, `zul`, `sna`, `afr`, `lat`, `slk`, `cat`, `tgl`, `hye`.

Author: ```suggestion
`locales` is a list of ISO-639-3 language codes to assign to a pattern. The currently supported languages are: `epo`, `eng`, `rus`, `cmn`, `spa`, `por`, `ita`, `ben`, `fra`, `deu`, `ukr`, `kat`, `ara`, `hin`, `jpn`, `heb`, `yid`, `pol`, `amh`, `jav`, `kor`, `nob`, `dan`, `swe`, `fin`, `tur`, `nld`, `hun`, `ces`, `ell`, `bul`, `bel`, `mar`, `kan`, `ron`, `slv`, `hrv`, `srp`, `mkd`, `lit`, `lav`, `est`, `tam`, `vie`, `urd`, `tha`, `guj`, `uzb`, `pan`, `aze`, `ind`, `tel`, `pes`, `mal`, `ori`, `mya`, `nep`, `sin`, `khm`, `tuk`, `aka`, `zul`, `sna`, `afr`, `lat`, `slk`, `cat`, `tgl`, `hye`.
```

# v1.10.0 release changelogs

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

# v1.10.0 release changelogs

Meilisearch v1.10 introduces federated search. This innovative feature allows you to receive a single list of results for multi-search requests. v1.10 also includes a setting to manually define which language or languages are present in your documents, and two new new experimental features: the `CONTAINS` filter operator and the ability to update a subset of your dataset with a function.

🧰 All official Meilisearch integrations (including SDKs, clients, and other tools) are compatible with this Meilisearch release. Integration deployment happens between 4 to 48 hours after a new version becomes available.

> <!-- The following lines should NOT be put in the PRE-release changelogs -->

Author: ```suggestion
```

# v1.10.0 release changelogs

Meilisearch v1.10 introduces federated search. This innovative feature allows you to receive a single list of results for multi-search requests. v1.10 also includes a setting to manually define which language or languages are present in your documents, and two new new experimental features: the `CONTAINS` filter operator and the ability to update a subset of your dataset with a function.

> <!-- The following lines should NOT be put in the PRE-release changelogs -->

Author: ```suggestion
```

🧰 All official Meilisearch integrations (including SDKs, clients, and other tools) are compatible with this Meilisearch release. Integration deployment happens between 4 to 48 hours after a new version becomes available.

> <!-- The following lines should NOT be put in the PRE-release changelogs -->

Author: ```suggestion
```

# v1.10.0 release changelogs

<!-- The following line should ONLY be put PRE-release changelogs -->

> ⚠️ Since this is a release candidate (RC), we do NOT recommend using it in a production environment. Is something not working as expected? We welcome [bug reports](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/issues/new/choose) and [feedback about new features](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> [!WARNING]
> Since this is a release candidate (RC), we do NOT recommend using it in a production environment. Is something not working as expected? We welcome [bug reports](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/issues/new/choose) and [feedback about new features](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions).
```

- `response`: A JSON value that represents a fragment of the response made by the remote embedder to Meilisearch. The embedding must be replaced by the placeholder value `"{{embedding}}"`.

Before:

```json5
// v1.9 (old) version
{
  "source": "rest",
  "url": "https://localhost:10006",
  "query": {
    "model": "minillm",
 },
  "inputField": ["prompt"],
  "inputType": "text",
  "embeddingObject": ["embedding"]
}
```

```json5
// v1.10 (new) version
{
  "source": "rest",
  "url": "https://localhost:10006",
  "request": {
    "model": "minillm",
    "prompt": "{{text}}"
 },
  "response": {
    "embedding": "{{embedding}}"
 }
}
```
> [!CAUTION]
> This is a breaking change to the configuration of REST embedders.
> Importing a dump containing a REST embedder configuration will fail in v1.10 with an error: "Error: unknown field `query`, expected one of `source`, `model`, `revision`, `apiKey`, `dimensions`, `documentTemplate`, `url`, `request`, `response`, `distribution` at line 1 column 752".

Upgrade procedure (Cloud):

> 1. Remove any embedder with source "rest"
> 2. Follow the usual steps described [here in the documentatino](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/update_and_migration/updating#updating-meilisearch-cloud)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Remove any embedder with source "rest"
2. Follow the usual steps described [here in the documentation](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/update_and_migration/updating#updating-meilisearch-cloud)
```

Upgrade procedure (Open-source users):

1. Remove any embedder with source "rest"

> 2. Follow the usual steps described [here in the documentatino](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/update_and_migration/updating#updating-a-self-hosted-meilisearch-instance)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Follow the usual steps described [here in the documentation](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/update_and_migration/updating#updating-a-self-hosted-meilisearch-instance)
```

* Improve error message when indexing documents and embeddings are missing for a user-provided embedder
* Improve error message when a model configuration cannot be loaded and its "architectures" field does not contain "BertModel"

## ⚠️ Important change regarding the minimal Ubuntu version compatible with Meilisearch

Because the GitHub Actions runner now enforces the usage of a Node version that is not compatible with Ubuntu 18.04 anymore, we had to upgrade the minimal Ubuntu version compatible with Meilisearch. Indeed, we use these GitHub actions to build and provide our binaries.

Now, Meilisearch is only compatible with Ubuntu 20.04 and later and not with Ubuntu 18.4 anymore.

Done by @curquiza in #4783.

## Other improvements

* Search speed optimization: implement intersection at the end of the search pipeline by @Kerollmops in #4717
* Indexing speed optimization: stop opening indexes to only check if they exist by @Karribalu in #4787
* Improve tenant token error messages by @irevoire in #4724
* Add null byte as hard context separator by @LukasKalbertodt in meilisearch/charabia#295

> * Adds all [math symbols](https://www.compart.com/en/unicode/category/Sm) to the default separator list by @phillitrOSU in meilisearch/charabia#301

Reviewer 3: Nice! I came to add it but it's already done 🤩

* Improve error message when a model configuration cannot be loaded and its "architectures" field does not contain "BertModel"

## ⚠️ Important change regarding the minimal Ubuntu version compatible with Meilisearch

Because the GitHub Actions runner now enforces the usage of a Node version that is not compatible with Ubuntu 18.04 anymore, we had to upgrade the minimal Ubuntu version compatible with Meilisearch. Indeed, we use these GitHub actions to build and provide our binaries.

Now, Meilisearch is only compatible with Ubuntu 20.04 and later and not with Ubuntu 18.4 anymore.

Done by @curquiza in #4783.

## Other improvements

* Search speed optimization: implement intersection at the end of the search pipeline by @Kerollmops in #4717
* Indexing speed optimization: stop opening indexes to only check if they exist by @Karribalu in #4787
* Improve tenant token error messages by @irevoire in #4724
* Add null byte as hard context separator by @LukasKalbertodt in meilisearch/charabia#295
* Adds all [math symbols](https://www.compart.com/en/unicode/category/Sm) to the default separator list by @phillitrOSU in meilisearch/charabia#301

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Errors emitted at the main level of the Meilisearch binary are now logged with level `ERROR` by @dureuill in #4835

```

# v1.10.0 release changelogs

<!-- The following line should ONLY be put PRE-release changelogs -->
> [!WARNING]
> Since this is a release candidate (RC), we do NOT recommend using it in a production environment. Is something not working as expected? We welcome [bug reports](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/issues/new/choose) and [feedback about new features](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions).

> With Meilisearch v1.10 we keep innovating by introducing the really demanded federated search! You can know apply multi-search requests and get one single list of results 🎉. This version also includes a setting to define your index languages (even if multiple languages are in your documents!), and new experimental features like the `CONTAINS` operator and the ability to update a subset of your dataset by using a simple function.

Author: Can you keep the innovation thing? It's something none of our competitors have 😇

> With Meilisearch v1.10 we keep innovating by introducing the really demanded federated search! You can know apply multi-search requests and get one single list of results 🎉. This version also includes a setting to define your index languages (even if multiple languages are in your documents!), and new experimental features like the `CONTAINS` operator and the ability to update a subset of your dataset by using a simple function.

Reviewer 4: I can, but I'm against it because it's impossible to do it without sounding like we're giving ourselves a self-high-five. I personally dislike that and feel it's out of place in a document like a changelog.

It's your call, though, so here's a version mentioning that.

```suggestion
Meilisearch v1.10 introduces federated search. This innovative feature allows you to receive a single list of results for multi-search requests. v1.10 also includes a setting to manually define which language or languages are present in your documents, and two new new experimental features: the `CONTAINS` filter operator and the ability to update a subset of your dataset with a function.
```

`attributePattern` is a pattern that can start or end with a `*` to match one or several attributes.

`"locales": [], "attributePatterns": ["*"]` means the is the default rule.

Notes:
- if an attribute matches several rules, only the first rule in the list will be applied
- if the locales list is empty, then Meilisearch is allowed to auto-detect any language in the matching attributes
- These rules are applied to the `searchableAttributes`, the `filterableAttributes`, and the `sortableAttributes`.

### At search time

The search route accepts a new parameter, `locales` allowing the end-user to define the language used in the current query:

```bash
curl \
 -X POST http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
 --data-binary '{
  "q": "進撃の巨人",
  "locales": ["jpn"]
}'
```

The `locales` parameter overrides eventual `locales` in the index settings.

> ## Experimental: edit documents by using a function

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Experimental: Edit documents with a Rhai function
```

> You can edit documents by executing a [Rhai function](https://rhai.rs/) on all the documents of your database or a subset of them that you can select by a Meilisearch filter.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Use a [Rhai function](https://rhai.rs/) to edit documents in your database directly from Meilisearch:
```

> Activate the experimental feature:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
First, activate the experimental feature:
```

```bash
curl \
 -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/experimental-features/' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
 --data-binary '{
    "editDocumentsByFunction": true
 }'
```

> By indexing this [movies dataset](https://www.meilisearch.com/movies.json), you can run the following Rhai function on all of them. This function will uppercase the titles of the movies with an `id` > 3000 and add sparkles around it. Rhai templating syntax is applied here:

Reviewer 4: Then query the `/documents/edit` route with the editing function:

Author: I'm not sure I understand, what should I change?

Reviewer 4: Duh, I forgot to make it an actual suggestion, sorry. Fixed in the original comment.

```bash
curl http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/documents/edit \
 -H 'content-type: application/json' \
  -d '{

>  "filter": "id > 3000",
>  "function": "doc.title = `✨ ${doc.title.to_upper()} ✨`"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
   "function": "doc.title = `✨ ${doc.title.to_upper()} ✨`",
   "filter": "id > 3000"
```

 }'
```

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

`/documents/edit` accepts two parameters in its payload: `function` and `filter`.

`function` must be a string with a Rhai function. `filter` must be a [filter expression.](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/filtering_and_sorting/filter_expression_reference)

```

Author: Not only, `context` is also acceptable

`function` is mandatory, but `filter` and `context` are not

https://meilisearch.notion.site/Update-Documents-by-Function-0cff8fea7655436592e7c8a6de932062

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

`/documents/edit` accepts three parameters in its payload: `function`, `filter`, and `context`.

`function` must be a string with a Rhai function. `filter` must be a [filter expression.](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/filtering_and_sorting/filter_expression_reference). `context` must be an object with data you want to make available for the editing function.

```

📖 More information [here](https://meilisearch.notion.site/Update-Documents-by-Function-0cff8fea7655436592e7c8a6de932062).

🗣️ This is an experimental feature and we need your help to improve it! Share your thoughts and feedback on this [GitHub discussion](https://github.com/orgs/meilisearch/discussions/762).

Done by @Kerollmops in #4626.

## Experimental AI-powered search: quality of life improvements

For the purpose of future stabilization of the feature, we are applying changes and quality-of-life improvements.

Done by @dureuill in #4801, #4815, #4818, #4822.

> ### ⚠️ Breaking changes - changing the parameters of the REST API

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### ⚠️ Breaking changes: Changing the parameters of the REST API
```

The old parameters of the REST API are too numerous and confusing.

Removed parameters: `query` , `inputField`, `inputType`, `pathToEmbeddings` and `embeddingObject`.
Replaced by
- `request` : A JSON value that represents the request made by Meilisearch to the remote embedder. The text to embed must be replaced by the placeholder value `“{{text}}”`.
- `response`: A JSON value that represents a fragment of the response made by the remote embedder to Meilisearch. The embedding must be replaced by the placeholder value `"{{embedding}}"`.

Before:

> ```json5
> // v1.9 (old) version
> {
>   "source": "rest",
>   "url": "https://localhost:10006",
>   "query": {
>     "model": "minillm",
>  },
>   "inputField": ["prompt"],
>   "inputType": "text",
>   "embeddingObject": ["embedding"]
> }
> ```
> 
> ```json5
> // v1.10 (new) version
> {
>   "source": "rest",
>   "url": "https://localhost:10006",
>   "request": {
>     "model": "minillm",
>     "prompt": "{{text}}"
>  },
>   "response": {
>     "embedding": "{{embedding}}"
>  }
> }
> ```

Reviewer 4: ````suggestion
```json5
// v1.10 version ✅ 
{
  "source": "rest",
  "url": "https://localhost:10006",
  "request": {
    "model": "minillm",
    "prompt": "{{text}}"
 },
  "response": {
    "embedding": "{{embedding}}"
 }
}
```

```json5
// v1.9 version ❌
{
  "source": "rest",
  "url": "https://localhost:10006",
  "query": {
    "model": "minillm",
 },
  "inputField": ["prompt"],
  "inputType": "text",
  "embeddingObject": ["embedding"]
}
```

````

> [!CAUTION]
> This is a breaking change to the configuration of REST embedders.
> Importing a dump containing a REST embedder configuration will fail in v1.10 with an error: "Error: unknown field `query`, expected one of `source`, `model`, `revision`, `apiKey`, `dimensions`, `documentTemplate`, `url`, `request`, `response`, `distribution` at line 1 column 752".

> Upgrade procedure (Cloud):
> 
> 1. Remove any embedder with source "rest"
> 2. Follow the usual steps described [here in the documentation](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/update_and_migration/updating#updating-meilisearch-cloud)
> 
> Upgrade procedure (Open-source users):
> 
> 1. Remove any embedder with source "rest"
> 2. Follow the usual steps described [here in the documentation](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/update_and_migration/updating#updating-a-self-hosted-meilisearch-instance)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Upgrade procedure (Cloud):

1. Remove embedders with source `"rest"`
2. Update your [Meilisearch Cloud project](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/update_and_migration/updating#updating-meilisearch-cloud) or [self-hosted Meilisearch instance](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/learn/update_and_migration/updating#updating-a-self-hosted-meilisearch-instance) as usual
```

### Add custom headers to REST embedders

> When the `source` of an embedder is set to `rest`, `headers` is now available as an optional parameter.
> 
> Previously, the parameter did not exist. Trying to use the `headers` parameter for any other `source` is an `invalid_settings_embedder` error.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When the `source` of an embedder is set to `rest`, you may include an optional `headers` parameter. Use this to configure custom headers you want Meilisearch to include in the requests it sends the embedder.
```

Embedding requests sent from Meilisearch to a remote REST embedder always contain two headers:

- `Authorization: Bearer <apiKey>` (only if `apiKey` was provided)
- `Content-Type: application/json`

When provided, `headers` should be a JSON object whose keys represent the name of additional headers to send in requests, and the values represent the value of these additional headers.

If `headers` is missing or `null` for a `rest` embedder, only `Authorization` and `Content-Type` are sent, as described above.

> If `headers` contains `Authorization` and `Content-Type`, the declared values will override the ones that are sent by default.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If `headers` contains `Authorization` and `Content-Type`, the declared values will override the ones that are sent by default.

Using the `headers` parameter for any other `source` besides `rest` results in an `invalid_settings_embedder` error.
```

### Federated results relevancy

When performing federated searches, use `federationOptions` in the request's `queries` array to configure the relevancy and the weight of each index:

```bash
curl \
 -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/multi-search' \
 -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
 --data-binary '{
  "federation": {},
  "queries": [
    {
      "q": "apple red",
      "indexUid": "fruits",
      "filter": "BOOSTED = true",
      "_showRankingScore": true,
      "federationOptions": {
        "weight": 3.0
      }
    },
    {
      "q": "apple red",
      "indexUid": "fruits",
      "_showRankingScore": true,
    }
  ]
}'
```

`federationOptions` must be an object. It supports a single field, `weight`, which must be a positive floating-point number:
- if `weight` < `1.0`, results from this index are __less__ likely to appear in the results
- if `weight` > `1.0`, results from this index are __more__ likely to appear in the results
- if not specified, `weight` defaults to `1.0`

<!-- The following lines should NOT be put in the PRE-release changelogs -->
📖 Consult the [official Meilisearch documentation](TBD) for more information about the merge algorithm.

> 
> <!-- The following line should ONLY be put PRE-release changelogs -->
> 📖 Consult the [in-progress usage page](https://meilisearch.notion.site/v1-10-federated-search-698dfe36ab6b4668b044f735fb40f0b2) for more information about the merge algorithm.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> <!-- The following lines should NOT be put in the PRE-release changelogs -->
> 📖 Consult the [official Meilisearch documentation](TBD) for more information about the merge algorithm.
> 
> <!-- The following line should ONLY be put PRE-release changelogs -->
> 📖 Consult the [in-progress usage page](https://meilisearch.notion.site/v1-10-federated-search-698dfe36ab6b4668b044f735fb40f0b2) for more information about the merge algorithm.

Author: ```suggestion
<!-- The following lines should NOT be put in the PRE-release changelogs -->
📖 Consult the [usage page](https://meilisearch.notion.site/v1-10-federated-search-698dfe36ab6b4668b044f735fb40f0b2) for more information about the merge algorithm.
```

<!-- The following line should ONLY be put PRE-release changelogs -->
📖 Consult the [in-progress usage page](https://meilisearch.notion.site/v1-10-federated-search-698dfe36ab6b4668b044f735fb40f0b2) for more information about the merge algorithm.

Done by @dureuill in #4769.

## Experimental: `CONTAINS` filter operator

Enable the `containsFilter` experimental feature to use the `CONTAINS` filter operator:

```bash
curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/experimental-features/' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "containsFilter": true
  }'
```

`CONTAINS` filters results containing partial matches to the specified string, similar to a SQL `LIKE`:

```bash
curl \
  -X POST http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "q": "super hero",
    "filter": "synopsis CONTAINS spider"
  }'
```

🗣️ This is an experimental feature, and we need your help to improve it! Share your thoughts and feedback on this [GitHub discussion](https://github.com/orgs/meilisearch/discussions/763).

Done by @irevoire in #4804.

> ## Language settings
> 
> You can now set up the language of your index in your settings and during the search. This will prevent users from using alternative Meilisearch images we were separately created until now (like for [Swedish](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/pull/4604) and [Japanese](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/pull/3882))
> 
> Done by @ManyTheFish in #4819.
> 
> ### Index settings
> 
> Use the newly introduced `localizedAttributes` setting (here is an example of handling multi-language documents):
> 
> ```bash
> curl \
>   -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings' \
>   -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
>   --data-binary '{
>     "localizedAttributes": [
>       {"locales": ["jpn"], "attributePatterns": ["*_ja"]},
>       {"locales": ["eng"], "attributePatterns": ["*_en"]},
>       {"locales": ["cmn"], "attributePatterns": ["*_zh"]},
>       {"locales": ["fra", "ita"], "attributePatterns": ["latin.*"]},
>       {"locales": [], "attributePatterns": ["*"]}
>     ]
>   }'
> ```
> 
> `locales` is a list of language codes to assign to a pattern, the supported codes are: `epo`, `eng`, `rus`, `cmn`, `spa`, `por`, `ita`, `ben`, `fra`, `deu`, `ukr`, `kat`, `ara`, `hin`, `jpn`, `heb`, `yid`, `pol`, `amh`, `jav`, `kor`, `nob`, `dan`, `swe`, `fin`, `tur`, `nld`, `hun`, `ces`, `ell`, `bul`, `bel`, `mar`, `kan`, `ron`, `slv`, `hrv`, `srp`, `mkd`, `lit`, `lav`, `est`, `tam`, `vie`, `urd`, `tha`, `guj`, `uzb`, `pan`, `aze`, `ind`, `tel`, `pes`, `mal`, `ori`, `mya`, `nep`, `sin`, `khm`, `tuk`, `aka`, `zul`, `sna`, `afr`, `lat`, `slk`, `cat`, `tgl`, `hye`.
> 
> `attributePattern` is a pattern that can start or end with a `*` to match one or several attributes.
> 
> `"locales": [], "attributePatterns": ["*"]` means the is the default rule.
> 
> Notes:
> - if an attribute matches several rules, only the first rule in the list will be applied
> - if the locales list is empty, then Meilisearch is allowed to auto-detect any language in the matching attributes
> - These rules are applied to the `searchableAttributes`, the `filterableAttributes`, and the `sortableAttributes`.
> 
> ### At search time
> 
> The search route accepts a new parameter, `locales` allowing the end-user to define the language used in the current query:
> 
> ```bash
> curl \
>   -X POST http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search \
>   -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
>   --data-binary '{
>     "q": "進撃の巨人",
>     "locales": ["jpn"]
>   }'
> ```
> 
> The `locales` parameter overrides eventual `locales` in the index settings.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Language settings

Use the new `localizedAttributes` index setting and the `locales` search parameter to explicitly set the languages used in document fields and the search query itself. This is particularly useful for <=v1.9 users who have to occasionally resort to alternative Meilisearch images due to language auto-detect issues in [Swedish](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/pull/4604) and [Japanese](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/pull/3882) datasets.

Done by @ManyTheFish in #4819.

### Set language during indexing with `localizedAttributes`

Use the newly introduced `localizedAttributes` setting to explicitly declare which languages correspond to which document fields:

```bash
curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "localizedAttributes": [
      {"locales": ["jpn"], "attributePatterns": ["*_ja"]},
      {"locales": ["eng"], "attributePatterns": ["*_en"]},
      {"locales": ["cmn"], "attributePatterns": ["*_zh"]},
      {"locales": ["fra", "ita"], "attributePatterns": ["latin.*"]},
      {"locales": [], "attributePatterns": ["*"]}
    ]
  }'
```

`locales` is a list of ISO 631-2/B language codes to assign to a pattern. The currently supported languages are: `epo`, `eng`, `rus`, `cmn`, `spa`, `por`, `ita`, `ben`, `fra`, `deu`, `ukr`, `kat`, `ara`, `hin`, `jpn`, `heb`, `yid`, `pol`, `amh`, `jav`, `kor`, `nob`, `dan`, `swe`, `fin`, `tur`, `nld`, `hun`, `ces`, `ell`, `bul`, `bel`, `mar`, `kan`, `ron`, `slv`, `hrv`, `srp`, `mkd`, `lit`, `lav`, `est`, `tam`, `vie`, `urd`, `tha`, `guj`, `uzb`, `pan`, `aze`, `ind`, `tel`, `pes`, `mal`, `ori`, `mya`, `nep`, `sin`, `khm`, `tuk`, `aka`, `zul`, `sna`, `afr`, `lat`, `slk`, `cat`, `tgl`, `hye`.

`attributePattern` is a pattern that can start or end with a `*` to match one or several attributes.

If an attribute matches several rules, only the first rule in the list will be applied. If the locales list is empty, then Meilisearch is allowed to auto-detect any language in the matching attributes.

These rules are applied to the `searchableAttributes`, the `filterableAttributes`, and the `sortableAttributes`.

### Set language at search time with `locales`

The `/search` route accepts a new parameter, `locales`. Use it to define the language used in the current query:

```bash
curl \
  -X POST http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "q": "進撃の巨人",
    "locales": ["jpn"]
  }'
```

The `locales` parameter overrides eventual `locales` in the index settings.
```

# v1.10.0 release changelogs

> <!-- The following line should ONLY be put PRE-release changelogs -->
> > [!WARNING]
> > Since this is a release candidate (RC), we do NOT recommend using it in a production environment. Is something not working as expected? We welcome [bug reports](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/issues/new/choose) and [feedback about new features](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions).

Author: ```suggestion
```

Meilisearch v1.10 introduces federated search. This innovative feature allows you to receive a single list of results for multi-search requests. v1.10 also includes a setting to manually define which language or languages are present in your documents, and two new new experimental features: the `CONTAINS` filter operator and the ability to update a subset of your dataset with a function.

> <!-- The following lines should NOT be put in the PRE-release changelogs -->
> 🧰 All official Meilisearch integrations (including SDKs, clients, and other tools) are compatible with this Meilisearch release. Integration deployment happens between 4 to 48 hours after a new version becomes available.
> 
> <!-- The following lines should NOT be put in the PRE-release changelogs -->
> Some SDKs might not include all new features. Consult the project repository for detailed information. Is a feature you need missing from your chosen SDK? Create an issue letting us know you need it, or, for open-source karma points, open a PR implementing it (we'll love you for that ❤️).

Author: ```suggestion
```
